1. Git Overview

Git is a distributed version control system used to track changes in source code and enable multiple developers to collaborate on the same project safely.
Instead of storing files directly, Git records snapshots of changes over time. This allows developers to review history, revert changes, and work on new features without affecting the main project.

Key Concepts

Repository (Repo)
A repository is a project tracked by Git. It contains the project files and the full history of changes.

Local Repository
The copy of the repository stored on a developer’s computer. Developers make changes, commits, and branches locally before sharing them.

Remote Repository
A repository hosted on a server (such as Bitbucket or GitHub) that allows teams to share and collaborate on code.

Commit
A commit records a snapshot of changes in the repository. Each commit has a unique ID and includes information about what was changed.

Branch
A branch is an independent line of development. Developers create branches to work on features or bug fixes without affecting the main branch.

Clone
Cloning creates a copy of a remote repository on a local machine so developers can start working on the project.

Pull
Pulling retrieves the latest changes from the remote repository and updates the local repository.

Push
Pushing sends local commits to the remote repository so other team members can access them.
-----------------------------------------------------------
2. Git Workflow

This section describes the standard workflow developers should follow when working with Git.
The example below uses a sample repository called sample-app.

1) Clone the Repository
Cloning creates a local copy of the remote repository.

Command:

git clone https://github.com/example/sample-app.git

Example Output:

Cloning into 'sample-app'...
remote: Enumerating objects: 25, done.
remote: Counting objects: 100% (25/25), done.
Receiving objects: 100% (25/25), done.
Resolving deltas: 100% (8/8), done.
----------

2) Navigate to the Repository
Move into the project directory after cloning.

Command:

cd sample-app

Check repository status:

git status

Example Output:

On branch main
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/main'.

nothing to commit, working tree clean
----------

3) Create a Feature Branch

Developers should not work directly on the main branch.
Create a new branch for features or fixes.

Command:

git checkout -b feature/login-page

Example Output:

Switched to a new branch 'feature/login-page'
----------

4) Make Changes

Edit or add files in the project.

Example file creation:

touch login.html

Stage the changes:

git add login.html
----------

5) Commit Changes

Commit records a snapshot of the staged changes.

Command:

git commit -m "Add login page"

Example Output:

[feature/login-page 3a5f1d2] Add login page
 1 file changed, 10 insertions(+)
 create mode 100644 login.html
----------

6) Sync with Remote Before Push

Before pushing changes, update the branch with the latest remote updates.

Command:

git fetch origin
git pull origin main

Example Output:

From https://github.com/example/sample-app
 * branch            main       -> FETCH_HEAD
Already up to date.
----------

7) Push Changes to Remote

Push the local branch to the remote repository.

Command:

git push origin feature/login-page

Example Output:

Enumerating objects: 5, done.
Counting objects: 100% (5/5), done.
Writing objects: 100% (3/3), 300 bytes | 300.00 KiB/s, done.
remote: Create a pull request for 'feature/login-page'
To https://github.com/example/sample-app.git
 * [new branch]      feature/login-page -> feature/login-page
----------

8) Create a Pull Request (PR)

After pushing the branch, create a Pull Request in the repository hosting platform (GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket).

Steps:

Go to the repository in the web interface.

Select Create Pull Request.

Choose the source branch (feature/login-page).

Add description and reviewers.
----------

9) Code Review and Merge

Team members review the Pull Request.

Possible actions:

Approve the changes

Request modifications

Run automated CI checks

After approval, the branch is merged into the main branch.
----------

10) Update Local Repository

After the Pull Request is merged, update your local repository.

Command:

git checkout main
git pull origin main

Example Output:

Switched to branch 'main'
Updating 8a7d3c2..9b4f2d1
Fast-forward
 login.html | 10 ++++++++++
 1 file changed, 10 insertions(+)
----------

11) Clean Old Branches

After merging, delete the local feature branch to keep the repository clean.

Command:

git branch -d feature/login-page

Example Output:

Deleted branch feature/login-page (was 3a5f1d2).

To remove deleted remote branches from your local list:

git fetch --prune
----------

Summary
Following this workflow ensures that developers:
Work in isolated feature branches
Keep their code synchronized with the remote repository
Collaborate through Pull Requests
Maintain a clean and organized Git history

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. Best Practices

1) Always Work on a Feature Branch
Avoid committing directly to the main or master branch.
Create a separate branch for each feature, bug fix, or task.

Example:

git checkout -b feature/user-authentication

This ensures the main branch remains stable and production-ready.


2) Pull Latest Changes Before Starting Work
Before making changes, always update your local repository to ensure you are working with the latest code.

git pull origin main

This helps prevent conflicts and outdated code.


3) Commit Small and Logical Changes
Make small, meaningful commits instead of large commits containing many unrelated changes.

Good practice:

git commit -m "Add validation for login form"

Avoid vague commit messages such as:

git commit -m "update"


4) Write Clear Commit Messages
A good commit message clearly describes the purpose of the change.

Recommended format:

[TKT-123] Add login API validation

Clear commit messages make it easier to review changes and understand project history.


5) Sync With Remote Frequently
Regularly fetch or pull updates from the remote repository to avoid branch divergence.

git fetch origin
git pull origin main

This reduces the chances of large merge conflicts later.

6) Review Changes Before Committing

Before committing, review the changes to ensure only intended modifications are included.

git status
git diff

This helps prevent accidental commits of unnecessary files.

7) Use Pull Requests for Code Integration

All code changes should be merged through a Pull Request (PR).
This allows team members to review the code and ensures quality before merging.

Pull Requests help with:

Code review

Automated testing

Maintaining code quality


8) Avoid Force Push on Shared Branches

Using force push can overwrite other developers' work.

Example (avoid using on shared branches):

git push --force

If necessary, use the safer option:

git push --force-with-lease


9) Keep the Repository Clean

Delete unused branches after they are merged.

git branch -d feature/login-page

This keeps the repository organized and easier to navigate.


10) Never Commit Sensitive Information

Avoid committing confidential data such as:

Passwords

API keys

Private keys

Configuration secrets

Use .gitignore to prevent sensitive files from being committed.

Example:

.env
*.key
*.pem


